feat(blog): add implicit-keyboard-binding-blog (#209)
bpmn-io/bpmn.io: src/blog/2025/001-play-nicely-with-others.md

---

title: Playing Nicely With Others
layout: blogpost.hbs

slug: 2025-bpmn-js-18-playing-nicely-with-others
author: Nico Rehwaldt <https://github.com/nikku>
description: "Introducing bpmn-js v18 (and related diagram-js v15). The releases rework how diagrams integrate with any webpage or application: They turn the diagram canvas into a selectable element and make key functions such as keyboard shortcuts activation implicit. As a result, diagram interaction becomes more predictable, and hence diagrams play nicely with others, per default."
url: blog/posts/2025-bpmn-js-18-playing-nicely-with-others.html
preview_image: http://bpmn.io/assets/attachments/blog/2025/001-preview.png
published: 2025-01-20 9:21

> published_time: "2024-01-20T9:21:11+01:00"
> modified_time: "2024-01-20T9:21:11+01:00"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
published_time: "2025-01-20T9:21:11+01:00"
modified_time: "2025-01-20T9:21:11+01:00"
```

</p>

<!-- continue -->

With pleasure, we've observed over the years many integrations of our toolkits into [various complex applications](https://page.camunda.com/camunda-community-summit-2023-bpmnio-outside-of-camunda#main_content-module-4). In fact, with the [Camunda Modeler](https://github.com/camunda/camunda-modeler) and its web-based sister project, parts of our team work on integration into complex application landscapes, themselves.

We have seen that a smooth integration of our diagram editors is not always easy, especially when you have keyboard shortcuts in place. One reason is that the diagram canvas has always been an alien on a website. It did not offer any immediately focusable element and hence was non-existent from the browsers [accessibility tree](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Accessibility_tree). At the same time, resembling browser-like keyboard interaction without actual browser focus is _hard_, if not impossible.

## Embed Anywhere, Embed Safely

> To overcome past limitations, [bpmn-js v18](https://github.com/bpmn-io/bpmn-js/blob/develop/CHANGELOG.md#1800) / [diagram-js v15](https://github.com/bpmn-io/diagram-js/blob/v15.0.0/CHANGELOG.md#1500) turn the canvas into a browser native, focusable element. Multiple diagram editors and other complex components play nicely with each other, and batteries—including keyboard support—are included.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To overcome past limitations, [bpmn-js v18](https://github.com/bpmn-io/bpmn-js/blob/develop/CHANGELOG.md#1800) / [diagram-js v15](https://github.com/bpmn-io/diagram-js/blob/v15.0.0/CHANGELOG.md#1500) turn the canvas into a browser native, focusable element. Multiple diagram editors and other complex components integrate nicely, and batteries — including keyboard support — are included.
```

## No More Explicit Keyboard Binding

To activate keyboard shortcuts, you would previously need to explicitly pass a keyboard container. This would often be the diagram container itself, manually made selectable, or the `document`. The latter option would break keyboard interaction and integration with other parts of your website or application in interesting ways.

With the new library releases, the explicit binding option is gone. Instead, keyboard shortcuts trigger whenever the diagram canvas has browser focus.

```diff
--- a/app.js
+++ b/app.js
@@ -3,9 +3,6 @@ import Modeler from 'bpmn-js/lib/Modeler';

     const modeler = new Modeler({
       container,
-      keyboard: {
-        bindTo: document
-      }
     });
```

## Observing and Controlling Focus State

UX-wise, the changes should be non-breaking for most applications. Where manual control is needed, the diagram offers support to observe and control focus behavior:

```js

> modeler.on('canvas.focus.changed', ({ focussed }) => {
>   console.log('Canvas focussed?', focussed);
> });
> 
> modeler.get('canvas').focus();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
modeler.on('canvas.focus.changed', ({ focused }) => {
  console.log('Canvas focused?', focused);
});

const isFocused = modeler.get('canvas').isFocused();

// Force focus onto the canvas.
modeler.get('canvas').focus();

// Focus the canvas if no other element is focused.
modeler.get('canvas').restoreFocus();
```

Reviewer: If you don't want to add all the API functions here, pay attention to the spelling of `focused` (vs. `focussed`).

Author: I think as we have typings the majority of APIs will be easily discoverable (on the canvas), I'd hence not add all of them here.

Author: Great point on spelling :upside_down_face:, will fix.
